---
layout: post
title: *DRAFT* What's /etc/nsswitch.conf?
permalink: /nsswitch
date: 2024-07-04 15:13:25 +0300
author: Roee Toledano
---

## Prolouge 

This will be a relatively short writeup.
I'm writing this writeup because I came across `nsswitch` while reading about DNS resolution in Linux, and couldn't seem to find any good explanation of this file.

qouted from the Linux docs:

_"The Name Service Switch (NSS) configuration file, /etc/nsswitch.conf, is used by the GNU C Library and certain other applications to determine the sources from which to obtain name-service information in a range of categories, and in what order.  Each category of information is identified by a database name."_

So basically, it's a file used by glibc and other programs to know from where to fetch certain resources. 
But we want to know more! :)

## Diving in

So now that we know _basically_ what nsswitch.conf is, we can dive in deeper.
I've spunned up a Debian VM and this is my /etc/nsswitch.conf:

```
# /etc/nsswitch.conf
#
# Example configuration of GNU Name Service Switch functionality.
# If you have the `glibc-doc-reference' and `info' packages installed, try:
# `info libc "Name Service Switch"' for information about this file.

passwd:         files
group:          files
shadow:         files
gshadow:        files

hosts:          files mdns4_minimal [NOTFOUND=return] dns myhostname
networks:       files

protocols:      db files
services:       db files
ethers:         db files
rpc:            db files

netgroup:       nis
```

Your's might be different, but still resembles the above.

We already recognize some stuff here: `passwd`, `rpc`, `hosts`, `shadow` etc (if you don't recognize, go look these keywords up!).

Hmmm.. So I guess when `glibc` or other programms need to access `/etc/passwd`, `/etc/shadow`, `rpc` etc they come to this file?
Let's see if we're correct. Let's take `passwd` for example:

A great example for a program that accesses the `/etc/passwd` file is of course the `passwd` program!

> **_NOTE:_** I forgot to metion, but the `passwd` program is used to change the password of one of the users on the system. The `/etc/passwd` file is used to get information such as what users the system has, what groups doesa aech user belong to, their default shell, etc.

> **_NOTE:_** Ironically, the `passwd` program also acccesses the `/etc/shadow` file, which contains the encrypted password hash for every user on the system. But for now let's focus on `/etc/passwd`

Let's see what syscalls `passwd` uses:

``$ strace passwd``

We get a bunch of stuff, notably:

```
newfstatat(AT_FDCWD, "/etc/nsswitch.conf", {st_mode=S_IFREG|0644, st_size=537, ...}, 0) = 0
newfstatat(AT_FDCWD, "/", {st_mode=S_IFDIR|0755, st_size=4096, ...}, 0) = 0
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/etc/nsswitch.conf", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
newfstatat(3, "", {st_mode=S_IFREG|0644, st_size=537, ...}, AT_EMPTY_PATH) = 0
read(3, "# /etc/nsswitch.conf\n#\n# Example"..., 4096) = 537
read(3, "", 4096)                       = 0
newfstatat(3, "", {st_mode=S_IFREG|0644, st_size=537, ...}, AT_EMPTY_PATH) = 0
close(3)                                = 0
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/etc/passwd", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
newfstatat(3, "", {st_mode=S_IFREG|0644, st_size=2136, ...}, AT_EMPTY_PATH) = 0
lseek(3, 0, SEEK_SET)                   = 0
read(3, "root:x:0:0:root:/root:/bin/bash\n"..., 4096) = 2136
close(3)
```

Let's break down these syscalls:

### The `newfstatat` syscall

From this [man](http://man.he.net/man2/newfstatat) page we can see that `fstatat` returns a `struct stat` which contains information about the file. If the `pathname` passed is relative, and the macro `AT_FDCWD` is passed as `dirfd`, then the passed directory is interpreted as relative to the current directory. 
But it seems the directory is an absolute path... **

> **_NOTE:_** You might be asking: "Hey! What's the `new` prefix though? As specified by the man page above, it's just wrapper to the actual `fstatat` syscall provided by glibc.

### The `openat` syscall

Using this [man](https://linux.die.net/man/2/openat) this one is similar to the more commonly known `open` syscall, but it's behavior is a bit different.

We can see that `openat` is used to open a file, and get a file descriptor associated with it. It has an `at` suffix, implying a similar behavior to what `newfstatat` has (which is correct! Check the man)

### The `read` syscall

Here is the [man](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/read.2.html).
Also a commonly known syscall. 

Reads `count` bytes of data from a file associated with a file descriptor `fd` into a buffer `buf`.

### The `close` syscall

Again, another commonly known syscall, wont dwelve on it too much. Used to disassociate a file from a file descriptor. Check out the [man](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/close.2.html) page for more info

### The `lseek syscall`

After we know what each syscall here means, we can understand what `passwd` is doing here:

1. queries info about the `/etc/nsswitch.conf` file
2. queries info about root directory **of the process** (Not necessarily the real root directory!)
3. opens the `/etc/nsswitch.conf` file
4. Tries to read `1KB` of data from `/etc/nsswitch.conf` into a buffer, but ends up reading only `537` bytes
5. opens `/etc/passwd`
6. moves to the start of the file
7. Tries to read `1KB` of data from `/etc/passwd`, ends up reading only `2136` bytes

> **_NOTE:_** I can confidently assume the reason only `537` and `2136` bytes were read because that is the size of the files `/etc/nsswitch.conf` and `/etc/passwd` respectively.

Anyway, our assumption was correct - `passwd` indeed accesses `/etc/passwd` 
