---
layout: post
title: *DUMP* notes for myself regarding /proc internals
permalink: /proc
date: 2024-07-11 15:13:25 +0300
author: Roee Toledano
---

## Prologue

So I'm currently working on a Linux rootkit project, and i wanted to learn about how /proc dirctory works.

This is just a dump of my thoughts and notes I took for myself. this is not written to be read by others, although it might be of value to those who embark on the same adventure so im posting it anyway


## Dump
So anyway, I know already that each process (and thread) in Linux is represented using a `struct task_struct`, defined in `/include/linux/sched.h` in the Linux source tree.

After some digging around, I found that the code for `/proc` vfs is under the `/fs/proc` directory.
Skimming over some of the files in it, seems like what we're interesting is probably found in:
1. 


Here is a list of functions related to it:

1. get_proc_task
2. get_pid_task - seems to return the struct task_struct associated with a pid

`struct proc_dir_entry` - the struct associated with a /proc dir
`struct file_operations` - a structure which contains pointers to functions, used to do operations on open fds (read, write, etc)
`struct inode_operations` - a structure which contains pointers to functions, used to do operations on actual files (not only those in persistant storage, also stuff in ram like /proc - any fs)
`struct pid_entry` - something to do with a structure called `pid_entry table`. UPDATE: i think this represends a pid dir entry. UPDATE2: seems like `tgid_base_stuff` is an example for a `pid_entry table`
`struct proc_ops` - a structure that i guess is used to define operations on a a /proc subdir or file

I've now stumbeled upon `proc_fs.h`, which seems to contain a lot of (if not all) of the structures and functions calls we might be interested in.

### List of functions from proc_fs.h

1. `proc_root_init` - i guess something to do with the initilization of the root /proc folder (ie the /proc folder itself). not dwelving too much on it though
2. `proc_flush_pid` - seems to be removing dache entries of a certain pid from the /proc dcache. from Wikipedia, a dcache seems to be a software using a certain tree structure way for caching stuff. again, dont really care rn
3. `proc_symlink` - seems to be a function to be used to create a symlink? it returns a `struct proc_dir_entry` though. its calling `__proc_create`, which by the function name, seems to be an internal function kern mods shouldn't be calling (which makes it sound very interesting... >:)) and its declared static so thats also that. which intern seems to be calling also `xlate_proc_name` which is calling `__xlate_proc_name`. its a big rabbit hole, i wont get too deep into it. ill just assume it is used to create a symlink in /proc
4. `proc_mkdir`, `_proc_mkdir`, `proc_mkdir_data` might contain some juicy stuff, as i assume it is what used to create a subdir in `/proc`. yeah seems my assumption is correct, skimming through some other files in the dir i can see this function is called, with the names of subdirs in /proc. `proc_mkdir` seems to also be calling `__proc_create`, which seems to be the low level function. also `proc_mkdir_data`, `proc_mkdir` etc seem to just be wrappers to `_proc_mkdir`. `_proc_mkdir` is also exported using `EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL`. nice!


anyway, after all of that digging seems to me that what we are looking for (the mechanism and process of creating each `/proc/<pid>`) is in `generic.c`.

`array.c` seems to be containing functions that are called at some point when interacting with the /proc files and subdirs.

hmm reading base.c rn, and it seems most of this file is functions used to set up each dir and file in /proc. it has a bunch of `struct inode_operations` for each such file or dir. 

1. `proc_pid_instantiate` - i think this function might be a major involved function in setting up each /proc/pid. `proc_tgid_base_inode_operations` might be its matching `inode_operations` struct
2. `proc_pident_instantiate` - could be the function to actually init the pid dir. it calls `proc_pid_make_inode`. `proc_pid_make_inode` also seems to be getting a `struct task_struct` as a parameter which is a good sign!
3. `proc_pid_make_inode` - calls `new_inode` - which most probably creates a new inode in /proc for the process associated with the `struct task_struct` passed to it

YES! I think we are in the right direction

it seems like `proc_pident_instantiate` does:
1. calls `proc_pid_make_inode` to create the inode for the pid subdir
2. sets up the `inode`.`inode_operations` with `struct pid_entry`.`inode_operations`
3. calls `set_nlink` with link count 2 to set the hardlink count to the inode to 2 
4. calls `pid_update_inode` with the `struct task_struct` (possibly the function which sets the values?)
5. calls `d_set_d_op` i guess to set up dcache entry or something? anyway don't really care

never mind, `pid_update_inode` doesn't seem to be it.

maybe `proc_pident_readdir` is the answer? it calls `proc_pident_instantiate`. it seems to be used under a wrapper by `proc_tid_base_readdir`, `proc_attr_dir_readdir` which seem to be used in some `sturct file_operations` structs.

i suspect `proc_tid_base_operations` is the `struct file_operations` that is used when reading pid dirs, since the `.read` member is assigned `generic_read_dir`, which seems to just return a "is dir" ret value, (and its used in `simple_dir_operations` on file `fs/libfs.c` which could be another hint)

im a bit lost. I found 
<!---
NOTE: 
check what is enum proc_hidepid
learn about EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL
you need to learn more about ext4
quickly read about ptrace
--->
